.Dd June 29, 2026
.Dt BYTELANG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bytelang
.Nd ByteLang interpreter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -check
.Op Fl -print-result
.Ar file.bl
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs ByteLang source files, checks them without execution, or prints a script's final returned value.
ByteLang is a small imperative scripting language aimed at hand-rolled abstractions, low-level work, arrays, buffers, named functions, and explicit runtime control.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -check
Parse and validate only.
.It Fl -print-result
Print the final returned value, if any.
.It Fl -help
Show usage information.
.El
.Sh IMPORTS
Two import forms are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic import\ "path/to/file"
Import a user-defined file by path.
.It Ic import\ {Lib}
Import an official global library from
.Pa ~/.bytelang/lib .
.El
The interpreter creates the global library directory on first run when needed, and project builds may sync checked-in libraries into that location.
.Sh OFFICIAL GLOBAL LIBRARIES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic String
Defines the
.Ic String
macro alias and native entry points
.Ic String.concat ,
.Ic String.cmp ,
and
.Ic String.length .
.It Ic Array
Defines native calls
.Ic Array.new ,
.Ic Array.grow ,
.Ic Array.set ,
.Ic Array.get ,
and
.Ic Array.length .
.It Ic Vector
Defines a growable vector convention layered over
.Ic Array .
.It Ic Tensor
Defines a tensor convention using flat data storage plus shape and rank metadata.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Check a file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bytelang --check script.bl
.Ed
.Pp
Run and print the returned value:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bytelang --print-result result.bl
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bytelang 7
