.Dd June 29, 2026
.Dt LAMBDASCRIPT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lambdascript
.Nd LambdaScript interpreter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q
.Op Fl t
.Op Fl n Ar steps
.Op Fl e Ar expr
.Op Fl -no-prelude
.Op Ar file
.Op Fl -
.Op Ar args ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
evaluates LambdaScript expressions from a string, file, or standard input.
The language centers on lambda calculus, numeric operators, symbolic logic, quantified forms, and list-like runtime values.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl e Ar expr
Evaluate an inline expression.
.It Fl n Ar steps
Limit or report reduction steps.
.It Fl q
Quiet mode; print the reduced term without extra narration.
.It Fl t
Trace reductions.
.It Fl -no-prelude
Disable the default prelude bindings.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage information.
.El
.Sh PRELUDE
The default prelude includes combinators and boolean helpers such as
.Ic I ,
.Ic K ,
.Ic S ,
.Ic TRUE ,
.Ic FALSE ,
.Ic AND ,
.Ic OR ,
.Ic NOT ,
.Ic IMP ,
and
.Ic IFF .
.Sh IMPORTS
Two import forms are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic import\ "path/to/file"
Import a user-defined file by path.
.It Ic import\ {Lib}
Import an official global library.
.El
Global library lookup uses:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Ev LAMBDASCRIPT_LIB_DIR
.It
.Ev XDG_DATA_HOME Ns Pa /lambdascript/lib
.It
.Ev HOME Ns Pa /.lambdascript/lib
.It
.Pa ./.lambdascript/lib
.El
.Sh OFFICIAL GLOBAL LIBRARIES
Current shipped libraries include:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic Logic
Defines
.Ic NAND ,
.Ic NOR ,
and
.Ic XOR .
.It Ic Vector
Defines immutable-sequence helpers such as
.Ic EMPTY ,
.Ic PUSH ,
.Ic FIRST ,
.Ic REST ,
.Ic LENGTH ,
.Ic APPEND ,
.Ic MAP ,
.Ic FILTER ,
.Ic FOLD ,
and
.Ic REVERSE .
.El
.Sh ARGUMENTS
When a script is executed with trailing arguments, runtime names such as
.Ic ARG1 ,
.Ic ARG2 ,
.Ic ARGC ,
and
.Ic ARGS
are populated.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Evaluate inline code:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lambdascript -q -e '(\x.x) y'
.Ed
.Pp
Run a file with script arguments:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lambdascript program.lambda -- one two three
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lambdascript 7
