.Dd June 29, 2026
.Dt XF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xf
.Nd XF language interpreter and REPL
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Op Fl e Ar code
.Op Ar file.xf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs XF programs from a file, evaluates inline XF code, or starts an interactive REPL when no input is given.
The implementation uses a lexer, parser, compiler, and VM pipeline.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl e Ar code
Evaluate inline XF source.
.It Fl j Ar jobs
Set the worker thread count used by runtime concurrency support.
.It Fl -version
Print the version and exit.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ar file.xf
Path to an XF script to execute.
.El
.Sh REPL
When no script path and no
.Fl e
expression are supplied,
.Nm
starts a readline-based interactive session.
.Sh LANGUAGE OVERVIEW
XF provides a dynamic scripting language with a VM runtime, built-in core modules, import support, formatted output, records, arrays, maps, tuples, sets, regular expressions, and concurrency primitives such as
.Ic spawn
and
.Ic join .
Special runtime variables include
.Ic NR ,
.Ic NF ,
.Ic FNR ,
.Ic FS ,
.Ic RS ,
.Ic OFS ,
.Ic ORS ,
and
.Ic OFMT .
See
.Xr xf-lang 7
and
.Xr xf-core 7 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa bin/release/xf
Typical built executable in the source tree.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Evaluate inline code:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xf -e 'print("hello")'
.Ed
.Pp
Run a script:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xf script.xf
.Ed
.Pp
Run with four worker threads:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xf -j 4 pipeline.xf
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xf-lang 7 ,
.Xr xf-core 7
.Sh AUTHORS
XF project authors.
