.Dd June 29, 2026
.Dt BYTELANG 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bytelang
.Nd ByteLang language overview
.Sh DESCRIPTION
ByteLang is a programmable scripting language built around deliberate lack of ready-made abstraction.
It favors a small core, explicit state, low-level buffers and arrays, named functions, and user-defined conventions over a large preset worldview.
.Sh CURRENT CORE
The implementation includes:
.Bl -bullet
.It
integers and strings
.It
buffers and arrays
.It
variables and assignment
.It
arithmetic and comparison
.It
if/else and while
.It
named functions
.It
manual allocation-oriented operations
.It
parser hooks for macro and native-extension forms
.El
.Sh VALUES AND TRUTHINESS
Falsey values include
.Ic null ,
integer zero, empty strings, and empty buffers or arrays.
Everything else is truthy.
.Sh BUILTINS
Builtins include:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic print , Ic println
Output helpers.
.It Ic assert
Runtime assertion.
.It Ic len
Length of strings, buffers, or arrays.
.It Ic string_new , Ic string_eq
String helpers.
.It Ic array_new , Ic array_grow , Ic array_set , Ic array_get , Ic array_len
Array helpers.
.It Ic malloc , Ic realloc
Allocation forms.
.El
.Sh IMPORTS
ByteLang supports local imports by path and official imports from the global library directory.
.Sh OFFICIAL LIBRARIES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic String
Low-level pointer-oriented string interface exposed as
.Ic String.concat ,
.Ic String.cmp ,
and
.Ic String.length .
.It Ic Array
Fixed-size mutable container interface.
.It Ic Vector
Growable sequence interface layered over
.Ic Array .
.It Ic Tensor
Flat-storage tensor interface with shape and rank metadata.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
import {String}

new String a = "abc";
new String b = "def";
new String c = String.concat(a, b);

println(String.length(c));
println(String.cmp(c, "abcdef"));
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bytelang 1
