.Dd June 29, 2026
.Dt XF-LANG 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xf-lang
.Nd overview of the XF language
.Sh DESCRIPTION
XF is a compiled-to-VM scripting language with an interactive REPL and a broad built-in module system.
The language surface includes declarations, expressions, statements, imports, formatting, pattern and text processing, and runtime concurrency.
.Sh LEXICAL AND SYNTACTIC SHAPE
The lexer and parser expose keywords and types including:
.Bl -bullet
.It
numeric, string, boolean, array, map, set, and tuple-oriented values
.It
control flow and function syntax
.It
import forms
.It
formatted output through
.Ic print ,
.Ic printf ,
and
.Ic outfmt
.It
runtime concurrency through
.Ic spawn
and
.Ic join
.El
.Sh SPECIAL VARIABLES
XF includes AWK-style record and formatting variables:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic NR
Total input record count.
.It Ic FNR
Per-file input record count.
.It Ic NF
Field count for the current record.
.It Ic FS
Input field separator.
.It Ic RS
Input record separator.
.It Ic OFS
Output field separator.
.It Ic ORS
Output record separator.
.It Ic OFMT
Numeric output format.
.El
.Sh EXECUTION MODEL
Source is tokenized, parsed, compiled, and executed on a VM.
The runtime also includes GC, SIMD support, and multithreaded helpers.
See
.Xr xf-vm 7 ,
.Xr xf-gc 7 ,
and
.Xr xf-mt 7 .
.Sh MODULES
Core functionality ships as built-in namespaces.
See
.Xr xf-core 7 .
.Sh EMBEDDED LANGUAGES
XF ships bridges for embedded LambdaScript and ByteLang through core modules.
Those subsystems remain separately documented by
.Xr lambdascript 1 ,
.Xr lambdascript 7 ,
.Xr bytelang 1 ,
and
.Xr bytelang 7 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xf 1 ,
.Xr xf-core 7
